[Music]
two days before hurricane Maria hit
Porto Rico I was there I was waiting in
line at a gas station in my car and the
line wrapped around the street with no
end in sight but at least my gas station
had an usher and as I waited my mom
calls she knows that this is gonna be a
catastrophic storm but I did what
daughter's to maybe what you would do I
say mom I've got this I'm ready we're
gonna be fine
and she did what moms do particularly
for Tariq and moms instead of telling me
how afraid she was she said Christina
why in the world are you in Porto Rico
wasting your time and your education
when you could be anywhere else in the
world and you worked so hard to leave
this place and her words felt like
knives and I quietly hung up the phone
she is running down my face as I inch my
way closer to the pump and I wish I had
known how right she was to be afraid oh
he didn't know what was coming and in
the back of my head I was wondering why
had I come back after I left when I was
18 what though Rico had stopped being a
place for opportunity for me after
hundred and twenty years of colonial
status to the US where does Rico was far
from an enchanted island I didn't get to
see the beauty that tourists get to see
I just felt bitterness bitterness
towards the corrupt government
bitterness towards the elite families
that seemed perfectly comfortable in the
extreme inequality bitterness towards
the fact that the beaches were full of
trash and the public spaces and
historical spaces were constantly
two-faced and poorly maintained and that
bitterness that disdain became a mantra
that everyone around me was echoing
Porto Ricans are lazy were corrupt
nothing good can happen here so you can
imagine why I left the way many Puerto
Ricans have left
feeling almost like a self-loathing and
a deep inferiority to the Western world
superiority but I was determined to
prove my worth and I wanted to make a
difference because I felt so trapped so
I pursued an Ivy League education I was
ruthless about my thirst for
understanding power because I felt on
the powerless side I became a TV show
host and a grant maker and then a
professor and when I finally found my
calling in education something strange
happened
I started feeling debilitating pain on
my right shoulder blade and I went to
physical therapists until one of them
told me listen that pain that you're
feeling it's associated with feeling
like you lack community and that hit me
I didn't feel like I had community and
that pain was calling me back home but
back home where and why my family had
left Porto Rico already and if you
didn't belong to a wealthy family why go
back anyway there was nothing there for
me but the calling was stronger and I
moved back to Puerto Rico nine months
before the hurricane was announced and
this is why I found myself waiting in
line at the gas station two days before
the hurricane made landfall the storm
was going to enter exactly where my
partner's house was located on the
southeast corner of the island in a
mountaintop town called Mariana my
partner said even if it's the worst here
listen we got community people know how
to take care of each other they know how
to find food and I grew up on the south
side of the island on the second largest
city of bonesy I had no idea what he was
talking about and I couldn't even
imagine it but I trusted him on
September 19th 2017 at 11 p.m. we were
awakened to the sound of exploding glass
I know until that moment I had only
heard that sound in horror movies and
thrillers like most people but this was
real so water was gushing
and the glass and the leaves and
everything so we went to our safe room
which was a tiny bathroom three adults a
dog and a cat and we locked ourselves in
water coming in from underneath the door
and we waited for hours endless and when
we emerged we could not believe our eyes
everything was gone it looked like a
bomb had exploded and we were
disoriented and displaced then people
started coming out from inside their
homes during those days if you were
stuck in an obstructed road everyone
that was in their cars would come out
almost as if pre rehearsed machetes in
hand and they together would chop down
the trees and open up the roads because
they knew what to do and on day four
after the hurricane we decided that we
were gonna open up a community kitchen
we didn't have food water or a kitchen
but we were determined so we heard
somewhere that you know maybe in in the
north part of the island there was going
to be some reception so we said all
right we're gonna go up there and we
wanted to tell everyone what we were
gonna do through Facebook in five days
we launched proyecto de apoyo mucho
which translates to mutual aid project
and by day ten we were feeding 300
people every day Monday to Friday out of
a completely self-run operation and
listen we weren't able to do this if it
hadn't been for a community so we
actually reached out to the association
that was based in Mariana that has been
working in Mariana for 36 years Atacama
Atacama had the space they had the
kitchen they had a big space for her
festival that they had been building for
32 years and we asked them can we use
this
and they said yes and then we went to
talk to the cooks and we said will you
cook for the people here and when then
we talked to the artists and we said
will you will you paint the signs and we
called our friends and we asked them
will you help us clean and they said yes
with the little that they had because
they knew we had to do something
unpredictable Yamoto Mariana was born
the space was full of solidarity and
beauty and reciprocity so the word
started spreading during those days it
was the people in front of us that were
the ones that were so important
donations started coming in but then the
people on the ground they would bring
whatever food they had that they
couldn't cook because they didn't have
gas stoves they would bring in whatever
tools they had whatever skills they
could contribute in whatever cash they
had in exchange for a meal and the word
started spreading so pretty soon we had
people from the region arriving we then
started receiving paramedics nurses and
doctors and aid so we had to create an
entire distribution system and surveys
in order to identify the needs of the
people and distribute and deliver things
according to what they needed where they
needed it and it was through this
process of doing that we were able to
move from a place of despair to
beginning to heal the way would work is
that the kids would arrive at 9:30 in
the morning they would set up the tables
and chairs and then they would start
playing chess and pretty soon hundreds
of people would arrive and then we would
deliver food to about 60 people across
the mountain in the community and then
everyone around us was asking wanting to
join and we asked them how contribute
whatever you know how to do what do you
love to do come and join us and there
was this one young man who approached us
and he said you're just regular people
what do you mean you're helping you're
actually doing that
and we said yeah come join us and so he
did and this young man changed his life
he later told us that his father had
said that people didn't really help
anymore not without an agenda and then
he started seeing what we were doing and
he decided to not leave Puerto Rico and
join the military and instead he stayed
and he studied on the island because he
started to see that a different word
that Rico was possible and this is when
we took a step back and looked at our
work and we realized we are building a
different Porto Rico we're building it
because you see when the entire physical
and material infrastructure collapsed
the only thing that remained was the
invisible life-saving infrastructure
which is our knowledge of where we are
in relation to each other our knowledge
of each other's skills our capacity to
work with our neighbor and sometimes
forgive our neighbor and mobilize
because when disasters happen the person
right in front of you is your best
chance at survival and this is when we
understood that the times we will be
facing as humanity will require us to
recognize that community is the most
important thing around us because when
there's no ATMs no communication systems
no food no water nothing you need to be
able to tap into a pre-existing system
of respect of trust of reciprocity and
from there you can rebuild in Mariana we
knew that we needed communication
systems we needed solar power we needed
water systems we spent six months
without running water nine months
without electricity so when we put out
the call for communication systems a
donor answered
and she funded a group of former US
Coast Guard errs who responded to Sandy
and within 24 hours they came to Mariana
and they installed Wi-Fi using solar
powered radios so we looked around and
we said well why can't we have Wi-Fi and
Mariana for everyone why can't we have
our own radio system and it we realized
that it was all we had to do was listen
to the people in front of us the people
on the ground they knew they were the
experts in what they needed so when
people started coming to grab a meal
with a hands raw purplish from hand
washing clothes in the river we realize
we need to build a solar laundromat and
we did and then we realized we need a
micro grid a solar micro grid and we got
a solar micro grid and filters and an
emergency plan pretty soon we were
building a model of what a community
needs to have to be healthy enough and
organized enough in order to be able to
face a natural disaster and our vision
now is to be able to share markers of
how we know if communities are ready to
be able to respond to extreme weather
conditions because it is communities
like mine these so called marginalized
communities they have had to create
alternative systems of survival because
they have had a lack a systemic lack of
basic human right services but if well
invested in and well organized these
communities are better suited to respond
when disasters happen and we owe it to
millions of communities like ours around
the world to share these lessons and
help them prepare for disasters we owe
it to the future generations that will
face a disproportionate burden of
climate change we owe it to the
ancestors and the activists and leaders
that have gotten us this far and we owe
it to the over three
in Puerto Ricans who died unnecessarily
after a game area
[Applause]
I watched as generations upon
generations of false narrative collapsed
before my eyes
what the Ricoh is doomed was a story and
the one that emerged was being lived by
the activists and the organizers and the
community leaders on the ground that are
working to this day right now in the
front lines
whether or not they can pay their bills
it turns out communities in Porto Rico
are powerful beyond measure they may not
make the headlines but they are generous
they're collaborative they're gonna come
we're gonna come up with some of the
most important innovations and solutions
for human adaptation because our lives
depend on it and we know why people died
it was not a natural disaster it was a
political and a man-made one and
therefore it can be solved how many
Puerto Ricans would have survived had
they lived in self-organized communities
like mariana we will never know but the
truth is that communities are the most
important force that will support
humanity to face great storms literally
and metaphorically the future will be
challenging all around us the sea level
will rot the sea levels will rise people
will be displaced and they will become
more and more isolated and suffer from
more and more mental health issues and
the states will likely fail to protect
their people the way the US and Puerto
Rico government's disappointed us but
communities will rise they will rise
because they were always standing they
were tending to the roots they were
teaching the history erased from books
they were doing the most radical thing
especially in a colony they were
building
from a place of dignity of abundance and
self-love and people like me who were
too jaded and too busy thinking about
power we just weren't looking thank you
[Applause]
[Music]